## 10-19

```shloka-sa

श्री भगवान् उवाच -
हन्त ते कथयिष्यामि विभूतीः आत्मनः शुभाः ।
प्राधान्यतः कुरुश्रेष्ठ नास्त्यन्तो विस्तरस्य मे ॥ १९ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

zrI bhagavAn uvAca -
hanta te kathayiSyAmi vibhUtIH AtmanaH zubhAH |
prAdhAnyataH kuruzreSTha nAstyanto vistarasya me || 19 ||

```
`श्री भगवान् उवाच` `[zrI bhagavAn uvAca]` Lord Krishna said `हन्त` `[hanta]` Good! `कुरुश्रेष्ठ` `[kuruzreSTha]` Arjuna, `कथयिष्यामि` `[kathayiSyAmi]` I will tell `ते` `[te]` you `प्राधान्यतः` `[prAdhAnyataH]` what stands out in the `शुभाः` `[zubhAH]` favorable `आत्मनः विबूतीः` `[AtmanaH vibUtIH]` expanse of My might and My irresistible will. `नास्त्यन्तः` `[nAstyantaH]` There is no end `मे विस्तरस्य` `[me vistarasya]` to My expanse.

Lord Krishna says- 'Arjuna, I will tell you what stands out in the favorable expanse of My might'. Here, the phrase 'what stands out' is used to mean 'the most important and the most distinguished'- in other words, the chief and the special aspects of His might. 

This flows in later in this chapter as well ([10-24](10-24.md)) - 'I am the chief of the priests and advisors'.



<a name='applnote_157'></a>
> The specialties of the Lord are endless.



Lord Krishna says - 'I will now tell you the most famous manifestations of My might in this world - The entire expanse of My might is endless, so it's not possible to speak about it or listen to its elaboration'.

The Lord's ‘might' refers to His absolute ownership of the universe. 
[Earlier](10-4_to_10-5.md)
 in this chapter, after saying that the power to reason and other states-of-being come from Him, the Lord states in 
[10-7](10-7.md): 'The person who knows this expanse of My unlimited power and My associations - such a person sets to work and performs with unwavering focus and discipline'. There, the word ‘association’ meant Lord’s association with His activities such as the act of creation. The ‘might’ of the Lord is his pervasive ability to stimulate everything into activity.

Again, in 
[10-8](10-8.md)
, the Lord says - 'People with this awareness worship Me with the conviction that I am the origin of everything; that each and every entity gets stimulated with the initiative given by Me. They are filled with feelings of adoration for Me'.

The Lord’s control manifests as the stimulus for the activity in all beings. He controls by being present as the Self in each being. This is the way in which He pervades all beings and stimulates them into action- including their creation, sustenance and destruction. This is His yoga.


