## 10-4 to 10-5

```shloka-sa

बुद्धिः ज्ञानम् असम्मोहः क्षमा सत्यम् दमः शमः ।
सुखम् दुःखम् भवोऽभावो भयम् च अभयम् एव च ॥ ४ ॥
अहिम्सा समता तुष्टिः तपो दानम् यशोऽयशः ।
भवन्ति भावा भूतानाम् मत्त एव पृथक् विधाः ॥ ५ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

buddhiH jJAnam asammohaH kSamA satyam damaH zamaH |
sukham duHkham bhavo'bhAvo bhayam ca abhayam eva ca || 4 ||
ahimsA samatA tuSTiH tapo dAnam yazo'yazaH |
bhavanti bhAvA bhUtAnAm matta eva pRthak vidhAH || 5 ||

```
`पृथक् विधाः` `[pRthak vidhAH]` The various `भावाः` `[bhAvAH]` emotions `भूतानाम् भवन्ति` `[bhUtAnAm bhavanti]` that take place in all beings `मत्त एव भवन्ति` `[matta eva bhavanti]` arise from Me alone - `बुद्धि` `[buddhi]` recognition, `ज्ञानम्` `[jJAnam]` cognition, `असम्मोहः` `[asammohaH]` freedom from misconception, `क्षमा` `[kSamA]` forgiveness, `सत्यम्` `[satyam]` truth, `दमः` `[damaH]` control over voluntary actions, `शमः` `[zamaH]` control over oneself, `सुखम् दुःखम्` `[sukham duHkham]` comfort, discomfort, `भवः` `[bhavaH]` the state of having plenty, `अभावः` `[abhAvaH]` the state of discontent, `भयम्` `[bhayam]` fear `अभयम् एव च` `[abhayam eva ca]` and fearlessness too, `अहिम्सा` `[ahimsA]` the desire to avoid harming anyone, `समता` `[samatA]` the attitude of equanimity, `तुष्टिः` `[tuSTiH]` contentment, `तपः` `[tapaH]` focus, `दानम्` `[dAnam]` charity, `यशः` `[yazaH]` fame `अयशः` `[ayazaH]` and infamy.

_In the commentary that follows, each of the aspects in this Shloka are explained as a state of our being and our experience of that state._

There are different emotions, experiences and states-of-being - 

The feeling of ‘recognition’ happens when the brain notices similarity to something it knows. ‘Cognition’ is the experience of ‘knowing’ and identifying different conscious beings and non-conscious things

'Freedom from misconception' is to be free of ignorance and bias, which dull our ability to make distinctions. For example, ignorance about jewelry would make us bundle gold and pearl together. Bias would prevent us from learning the distinction between them. When we are free from bias and ignorance, we are free from misconception.

<a name='forgiveness_the_defn'></a>
‘Forgiveness’ is a state where our mind isn’t deformed even in the presence of agitation.

‘Truth’ is to say it 'as it is', in a way that's beneficial to the listener. It is stated here as a tendency that enables us to do this.

‘Control over voluntary actions’ is to desist from unfavorable subjects. Similarly, ‘control over oneself’ is the experience of controlling our thoughts and feelings- instead of being controlled by them.

‘Comfort’ is the experience of things which are favorable to us, while ‘discomfort’ is the experience of something unfavorable.

‘The state of having plenty’ is a state of mind that causes the feeling of comfort. ‘The state of discontent’ is fatigue in our mind, which causes an unfavorable experience.

‘Fear’ is discomfort that comes from perceiving the cause of future misfortune. ‘Fearlessness’ is to be free of such fear.

The ‘desire to avoid harming anyone’ is the state of not being the cause of any misery.

The ‘attitude of equanimity’ is to view fortune and misfortune equally- whether it happens to us, to people we adore, or to those who oppose us

With the quality of ‘contentment’, we are always joyous towards everyone.

‘Focus’ is to be engaged in the occupation prescribed for us, even when comfort and enjoyment are restrained.

‘Fame’ is when we’re known for virtuous qualities; ‘Infamy’ is to have a reputation of lacking virtue. Here, 'fame' and 'infamy' indicate the dual states of our mind associated with such reputations.

Similarly, the other virtues mentioned, such as 'focus' and 'charity' refer to our preferences and tendencies. 

All of us in this world keep going through these emotions, experiences and states-of-being. The Lord says - 'These emotions arise from Me'. Meaning, they are according to the Lord's will.

In the next Shloka, the Lord says that the 
[powers](4-12.md#gods_and_other_powers)
 behind this world are also subject to His will.


