## 11-25


```shloka-sa

दम्ष्ट्राकरालानि च ते मुखानि
दृष्ट्वैव कालानलसन्निभानि ।
दिशो न जाने न लभे च शर्म
प्रसीद देवेश जगन्निवास ॥ २५ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

damSTrAkarAlAni ca te mukhAni
dRSTvaiva kAlAnalasannibhAni |
dizo na jAne na labhe ca zarma
prasIda deveza jagannivAsa || 25 ||

```
`ते` `[te]` Your `मुखानि` `[mukhAni]` faces `दम्ष्ट्राकरालानि` `[damSTrAkarAlAni]` seem cruel with their terrible canines. `कालानलसन्निभानि` `[kAlAnalasannibhAni]` They are equivalent to the great fire that brings ultimate destruction. `दृष्ट्वैव` `[dRSTvaiva]` Just by seeing, `दिशो न जाने` `[dizo na jAne]` I cannot recognize any of the directions `शर्म च न लभे` `[zarma ca na labhe]` and I have lost my comfort. `देवेश` `[deveza]` O Lord of the 
[gods](4-12.md#gods_and_other_powers) `जगन्निवास` `[jagannivAsa]` in whom all the worlds reside, `प्रसीद` `[prasIda]` be pleased.

Your terrible faces are involved in destroying everything like the great fire which devours everything at the end of a 
[yuga](4-4.md#yugas)
. Seeing them, I have lost my sense of direction and I don't find any comfort. O Lord of all 
[gods and powers](4-12.md#gods_and_other_powers)
, in whom all the worlds reside, be pleased - return me to my original state - That is the desire expressed here.

In this way, Krishna demonstrated that the universe depends on Him for its continued state of being and functioning. He demonstrated that He alone will get the burden of this earth down, as per His liking. 

He does this by destroying the elements that intend to cause harm for personal gain, who are in the guise of kings on either side - standing by the sons of Dhrtarashtra or joining hands with Yudhishtira. 

Arjuna witnessed the overwhelming power of the Lord, His capability of creation and other activities. He saw a form that contains everyone inside it. He saw the destruction of Dhrtarashtra's sons and others in the Lord's form. 

Arjuna could see this destruction - even though it hadn’t taken place yet - with the divine sight presented to Him by the Lord. Having seen this, Arjuna says:


