## 11-37 part 2 to 11-38 part 1

```shloka-sa

अनन्त देवेश जगन्निवास
त्वम् अक्षरम् सदसत् तत्परम् यत् ॥ ३७ ॥
त्वम् आदिदेवः पुरुषः पुराणः
त्वम् अस्य विश्वस्य परम् निधानम्

```
```shloka-sa-hk

ananta deveza jagannivAsa
tvam akSaram sadasat tatparam yat || 37 ||
tvam AdidevaH puruSaH purANaH
tvam asya vizvasya param nidhAnam

```
`देवेश` `[deveza]` O Lord of 
[gods](4-12.md#gods_and_other_powers)
, `अनन्त` `[ananta]` You are outside the limits of space, time and material. `जगन्निवास` `[jagannivAsa]` You are the abode in which the universe resides. `त्वम् अक्षरम्` `[tvam akSaram]` You are the imperishable. `सत्` `[sat]` You are existence, `असत्` `[asat]` non-existence `यत् तत्परम्` `[yat tatparam]` and that which is beyond all of this. `त्वम् आदिदेवः` `[tvam AdidevaH]` You are the origin of all 
[powers](4-12.md#gods_and_other_powers)
. `पुरुषः` `[puruSaH]` You are the one who is known as the Supreme Being. `पुराणः` `[purANaH]` You are without a beginning. `परम् निधानम्` `[param nidhAnam]` You are the ultimate basis `अस्य विश्वस्य` `[asya vizvasya]` of this universe.

O Lord of 
[gods](4-12.md#gods_and_other_powers)
, You are outside the limits of space, time and material. You are the abode in which the universe resides. 

You are the imperishable - the one that does not wear out. You are the Essence of the Self, as described in 
`कठ उपनिशत्` `[kaTha upanizat]` :
 'The form of knowledge that is not born and does not die'. In other scriptures too, the Self is described as the one who does not perish. 

You are existence, the outcome of creation. You are non-existence too, the state of the universe prior to creation. You are the matter that’s present as the origin, before creation. You are also the outcome of creation. This outcome is the universe that can be classified using names, forms and shapes. Matter was present as its origin, when nothing could be distinguished in this way. 

Whatever is beyond this material world, along with every Self that’s in this material world - they are You. You are the essence of all that’s beyond the material world too. In this way, You are the origin of all 
[powers](4-12.md#gods_and_other_powers)
. You are the person without a beginning.

You are the basis on which this universe rests. By having the 
[universe as Your body](7-13.md#universe_as_his_body)
, You are its ultimate basis.

In this way, You are indeed the One who is addressed by all words and 
[powers](4-12.md#gods_and_other_powers)
 like the sun and the wind. This is stated next-


