## 12-12


```shloka-sa

श्रेयो हि ज्ञानम् अभ्यासात् ज्ञानात् ध्यानम् विशिष्यते ।
ध्यानात् कर्म फल त्यागः त्यागात् शान्तिरनन्तरम् ॥ १२ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

zreyo hi jJAnam abhyAsAt jJAnAt dhyAnam viziSyate |
dhyAnAt karma phala tyAgaH tyAgAt zAntiranantaram || 12 ||

```
`ज्ञानम्` `[jJAnam]` Knowledge `श्रेयो हि` `[zreyo hi]` is certainly superior `अभ्यासात्` `[abhyAsAt]` to mere practice. `ध्यानम्` `[dhyAnam]` Focus `विशिष्यते` `[viziSyate]` is special `ज्ञानात्` `[jJAnAt]` in comparison to knowledge. `ध्यानात्` `[dhyAnAt]` Beyond such focus `कर्म फल त्यागः` `[karma phala tyAgaH]` lies the ability to leave the outcomes of our actions. `शान्तिः अनन्तरम्` `[zAntiH anantaram]` Tranquility results soon after `त्यागात्` `[tyAgAt]` such renunciation.


<a name='applnote_172'></a>
> When it isn’t possible to adore the Lord or decipher the Self, [work without attachment](2-40.md#karmayoga).



It’s extremely difficult to practice the Lord's thoughts without supreme love for Him. When compared to this difficulty, the quest for the true nature of the Self, followed by its realization is more effective in uplifting the Self. 

Realization of the Self is tough as well, since the Self isn’t really evident to us. In comparison, the method of meditation - focusing thought on the Self to realize it - is special. 

However, even this isn’t easy. In comparison, 
[working without attachment](Back-to-Basics.md#karmayOga_a_defn)
 is superior in its simplicity. Such work is a means to achieve the Self and the Lord.

People get rid of all flaws and gain tranquility by working without attachment to outcomes. In such a tranquil mind, they gain the ability to focus thoughts on the Self. With this focused thought, they gain the realization of the Self. Ultimate 
[devotion](Chapter_7.md#bhakti_a_defn)
 comes from that realization.

In summary: Focusing on the Self is definitely recommended for those who aren’t capable of ultimate devotion. However, focus isn’t possible without a tranquil mind. In that case, it’s preferable to just work without attachment to outcomes - the knowledge of the Self is embedded in such work. This helps in achieving 
[the goal](Back-to-Basics.md#Moksha)
. 

The next Shloka describes the admirable qualities of a person who is dedicated to 
[working without attachment](Back-to-Basics.md#karmayOga_a_defn)
 to outcomes.


