## 12-13 to 12-14


```shloka-sa

अद्वेष्टा सर्व भूतानाम् मैत्रः करुण एव च ।
निर्ममो निरहङ्कारः सम दुःख सुखः क्षमी ॥ १३ ॥
सन्तुष्टः सततम् योगी यतात्मा दृढ निश्चयः ।
मयि अर्पित मनो बुद्धिः यो मद्भक्तः स मे प्रियः ॥ १४ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

adveSTA sarva bhUtAnAm maitraH karuNa eva ca |
nirmamo nirahaGkAraH sama duHkha sukhaH kSamI || 13 ||
santuSTaH satatam yogI yatAtmA dRDha nizcayaH |
mayi arpita mano buddhiH yo madbhaktaH sa me priyaH || 14 ||

```
`अद्वेष्टा` `[adveSTA]` Without hatred `सर्व भूतानाम्` `[sarva bhUtAnAm]` towards any being, `एव` `[eva]` with only `मैत्रः` `[maitraH]` friendship `करुण च` `[karuNa ca]` and compassion, `निर्ममो` `[nirmamo]` without possessiveness, `निरहङ्कारः` `[nirahaGkAraH]` without considering the body as the Self, `सम दुःख सुखः` `[sama duHkha sukhaH]` with the same outlook towards comfort and discomfort, `क्षमी` `[kSamI]` ever-forgiving, `सततम् सन्तुष्टः` `[satatam santuSTaH]` ever content, `योगी` `[yogI]` being in touch with his Self, `यतात्मा` `[yatAtmA]` he exercises control over himself. `दृढनिश्चयः` `[dRDhanizcayaH]` Being firm in his conviction, `अर्पित` `[arpita]` he dedicates `बुद्धिः मनः` `[buddhiH manaH]` his mind and intellect `मयि` `[mayi]` in Me. `यो मद्भक्तः` `[yo madbhaktaH]` Such a devotee of Mine `स मे प्रियः` `[sa me priyaH]` is dear to Me.

A devotee of the Lord has no hatred towards any being - including those who hate him and those who are unfavorable. Such a person knows that some will dislike him and be unfavorable sometimes. He considers it to comes from past misdeeds. The Lord wills them to behave this way. 

Hence, he is friendly towards all beings, including those who are unfriendly and are seen to cause harm. He has compassion towards those who suffer. 

He doesn't have any possessive feeling towards his body, his organs or anything related to them. Since he is without the confusion that his body is his Self, he has the same outlook towards comfort and discomfort - he is without ecstasy and agony in the presence of favorable and unfavorable sentiments that are willed by the Lord. 

Even when this devotee encounters unavoidable forms and feelings, he doesn’t get agitated. He has an attitude of tolerance and forgiveness. He is cheerful, being content with whatever is obtained to sustain his body. 

He is always in touch with his Self, constantly recognizing that it is different from the environment. He has control over his mind. He believes in scriptures that deal with the Self and Me. 

He has dedicated his mind and intellect to Me. He has conviction that I am the One who is worshipped by 
[working without attachments](2-40.md#karmayoga)
, knowing that he will realize the Self by this worship. 

This devotee of mine, who worships Me with 
[karmayOga](2-40.md#karmayoga)
, is dear to Me.


