## 13-34


```shloka-sa

क्षेत्र क्षेत्रज्ञयोः एवम् अन्तरम् ज्ञान चक्षुषा ।
भूतप्रकृति मोक्षम् च ये विदुः यान्ति ते परम् ॥ ३४ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

kSetra kSetrajJayoH evam antaram jJAna cakSuSA |
bhUtaprakRti mokSam ca ye viduH yAnti te param || 34 ||

```
`ये` `[ye]` People `ज्ञान चक्षुषा` `[jJAna cakSuSA]` with eyes of awareness `विदुः` `[viduH]` recognize `एवम् अन्तरम्` `[evam antaram]` this distinction `क्षेत्र क्षेत्रज्ञयोः` `[kSetra kSetrajJayoH]` between the 
[field of action](13-1.md#field_and_knower_of_field)
 and the 
[knower](13-1.md#field_and_knower_of_field)
. `ते च यान्ति` `[te ca yAnti]` They attain `पराम् मोक्षम्` `[parAm mokSam]` supreme freedom `भूत प्रकृति` `[bhUta prakRti]` from the material world.

This chapter described the distinction between the body as the 
[field of action](13-1.md#field_and_knower_of_field)
 and the Self as the 
[knower of this field](13-1.md#field_and_knower_of_field)
. Their distinct characteristics are realized by people with eyes of awareness. 

In addition, those who learn about freedom from the material world will attain the supreme - they achieve the Self, which is free of all bonds. This freedom is 
[Moksha](Back-to-Basics.md#Moksha)
. 

The virtues described in this chapter, such as 
[being without a sense of superiority](13-7.md#virtues_amanitvam)
, lead to 
[Moksha](Back-to-Basics.md#Moksha)
. 

The awareness about the distinctions between the Self and the body was laid out in this chapter. 

In summary, the body is a part of the environment. It is our field of action, a result of the elements. 

The knowledge to discriminate between the Self and the body, along with the 
[virtues required](13-7.md#virtues_amanitvam)
 to achieve freedom from the bonds of the environment were laid out in this chapter - starting with 
[being without a sense of superiority](13-7.md#virtues_amanitvam)
.

With this ability to discriminate the body and the Self, people learn and practice the 
[method](13-7.md#virtues_amanitvam)
 to get freedom from the environment. They achieve the Self in its true form - free of all limitations, an unbroken expanse of knowledge.



