## 14-26


```shloka-sa

माम् च योऽव्यभिचारेण भक्तियोगेन सेवते ।
स गुणान् समतीत्येतान् ब्रह्मभूयाय कल्पते ॥ २६ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

mAm ca yo'vyabhicAreNa bhaktiyogena sevate |
sa guNAn samatItyetAn brahmabhUyAya kalpate || 26 ||

```
`यः च` `[yaH ca]` And the person who `माम् सेवते` `[mAm sevate]` serves and experiences Me `अव्यभिचारेण` `[avyabhicAreNa]` with constant `भक्तियोगेन` `[bhaktiyogena]` [devotion](Chapter_7.md#bhakti_a_defn) `सः समतीत्य एतानि` `[saH samatItya etAni]` will completely overcome these 
[qualities](2-45_to_2-46.md#satva_rajas_tamas)
. `कल्पते` `[kalpate]` He is cut out `ब्रह्मभूयाय` `[brahmabhUyAya]` to experience the Self in its true form.

The method of distinguishing the body from the Self was described starting with [14-19](14-19.md), 'When the person realizes that the 
[three qualities](2-45_to_2-46.md#satva_rajas_tamas)
 make things happen, not the Self, nothing else...'. 



<a name='applnote_197'></a>
> The [three qualities](2-45_to_2-46.md#satva_rajas_tamas) can only be overcome by surrendering to the Lord with [devotion](Chapter_7.md#bhakti_a_defn).



Just by knowing the distinction and thinking about the Self and the body, a person doesn't earn the right to cross over the 
[three qualities](2-45_to_2-46.md#satva_rajas_tamas)
. He is still checked by the undesirable influence of past deeds – an influence that has lingered from beginning-less time.

In this Shloka, the Lord says - 'I am the One whose every intent is realized. I am the One with unsurpassed compassion, an ocean of affection to those who 
[surrender](7-19.md#Sharanagati)
 to Me. The 
[qualities](2-45_to_2-46.md#satva_rajas_tamas)
 are difficult to overcome. A person crosses over them when he serves and experiences Me with 
[constant devotion](Chapter_7.md#bhakti_a_defn)
 – a devotion that’s distinguished by its unwavering focus on one goal. This person is cut out to experience the Self - he becomes fit to realize the Self. 

Meaning, he achieves the Self in its true form, indestructible and inexhaustible.


