## 14-4


```shloka-sa

सर्व योनिषु कौन्तेय मूर्तयः सम्भवन्ति याः ।
तासाम् ब्रह्म महत् योनिः अहम् बीजप्रदः पिता ॥ ४ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

sarva yoniSu kaunteya mUrtayaH sambhavanti yAH |
tAsAm brahma mahat yoniH aham bIjapradaH pitA || 4 ||

```
`कौन्तेय` `[kaunteya]` Arjuna, `तासाम् योनिः` `[tAsAm yoniH]` the embryos of `मूर्तयः` `[mUrtayaH]` different forms `याः सम्भवन्ति` `[yAH sambhavanti]` that are born `सर्व योनिषु` `[sarva yoniSu]` in all wombs `ब्रह्म` `[brahma]` are the expanding universe, `महत्` `[mahat]` which originated in the cosmic inflation. `अहम् बीजप्रदः पिता` `[aham bIjapradaH pitA]` I am the father who infuses life in the embryo.

All beings in this universe have their origin in the material of the cosmic inflation.

That includes all humans - powerful, ordinary, handsome, ugly, cruel, kind, along with all animals, birds, plants and so on. All of their various forms originated from the plasma that formed during creation.

In this Shloka, The Lord says 'I have put together all conscious beings. Their bodies are made from the matter in the environment, which formed from the results of the cosmic inflation. I am the One who infuses life in the embryo, during their birth' - The Lord puts together the Self and the body of all conscious beings in accordance with their deeds.

In this way, the Lord explained that conscious beings get associated with inanimate matter at the start of creation. This association happens due to the influence of various deeds they committed in the past.

Next, He explains the reason why they repeatedly take birth in various wombs in different forms. 


