## 14-6


```shloka-sa

तत्र सत्त्वम् निर्मलत्वात् प्रकाशकम् अनामयम् ।
सुख सङ्गेन बध्नाति ज्ञान सङ्गेन चानघ ॥ ६ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

tatra sattvam nirmalatvAt prakAzakam anAmayam |
sukha saGgena badhnAti jJAna saGgena cAnagha || 6 ||

```
`अनघ` `[anagha]` Arjuna, `तत्र` `[tatra]` in the 
[three qualities](2-45_to_2-46.md#satva_rajas_tamas)
, `सत्त्वम्` `[sattvam]` the quality of serenity `प्रकाशकम्` `[prakAzakam]` illuminates and lets us know everything, `निर्मलत्वात्` `[nirmalatvAt]` by being flawless. `अनामयम्` `[anAmayam]` It has no disease associated with it. `बध्नाति` `[badhnAti]` It binds `सुख सङ्गेन` `[sukha saGgena]` due to attachment towards such comfort `ज्ञान सङ्गेन च` `[jJAna saGgena ca]` and due to attachment towards knowledge.

<a name='sattva'></a>
Among the three qualities of 
[sattva](14-6.md#sattva)
, 
[rajas](14-7.md#rajas)
 and 
[tamas](14-8.md#tamas)
, the nature of 
[sattva](14-6.md#sattva)
 is to illuminate by being flawless. Its flawlessness is in giving the joy of knowing without obscuring anything. Its nature is to generate the joy of knowledge alone - in this way, it is the source of joy. 

The word 'illuminate' means the realization of anything in its true form.



<a name='applnote_190'></a>
> Sattva is the joy of knowledge.



The quality of 
[sattva](14-6.md#sattva)
 does not have any effect that can be called as a disease. It is the source of well-being.

This quality called 
[sattva](14-6.md#sattva)
 binds the Self by attaching it to contentment and knowledge. It is the one that attaches a person to the comfort of being content and knowledgeable. As soon as such attachment is born, a person indulges in the material world to achieve it by his occupation or by rituals.

Then, this person is born in a womb, in a form suited to experience the fruits of his pursuit. In this way, the quality of 
[sattva](14-6.md#sattva)
 binds the person to experience the joy of knowledge. It rewards the joy of knowledge, again binding a person to this experience and craving for more. 

This is called 
[sattva](14-6.md#sattva)
.


