## 15-1


```shloka-sa

श्री भगवान् उवाच -
ऊर्ध्व मूलम् अधः शाखम् अश्वत्थम् प्राहुरव्ययम् ।
छन्दाम्सि यस्य पर्णानि यस्तम् वेद स वेदवित् ॥ १ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

zrI bhagavAn uvAca -
Urdhva mUlam adhaH zAkham azvattham prAhuravyayam |
chandAmsi yasya parNAni yastam veda sa vedavit || 1 ||

```
`श्री भगवान् उवाच` `[zrI bhagavAn uvAca]` The Lord says:
`प्राहुः` `[prAhuH]` It is said that `अश्वत्थम्` `[azvattham]` the material world is like a pepal tree `अव्ययम्` `[avyayam]` that does not wear out, `ऊर्ध्व मूलम्` `[Urdhva mUlam]` with its roots at the top `अधः शाखम्` `[adhaH zAkham]` and branches at the bottom. `छन्दाम्सि यस्य पर्णानि` `[chandAmsi yasya parNAni]` Its leaves are the Vedas. `यः तम् वेद` `[yaH tam veda]` The person who knows this tree `सः वेदवित्` `[saH vedavit]` is the one who knows the Vedas.

_The word 
`अश्वत्थ` `[azvattha]`
 has been translated as 'pepal tree'. This word can also be broken up as [shva:], which means tomorrow, [ashva:] meaning 'not tomorrow'. So [ashvattha:] means 'that which is not present tomorrow'. When this is used to describe the material world, it illustrates the temporary nature of this world. Yet, this Shloka says it does not wear out. How come? Read on._

Several scriptures refer to the material environment as a pepal tree that doesn't wear out, with its roots on top and branches below. The 
`कठा उपनिशत्` `[kaThA upanizat]` , 6-1
 says 'With its roots at the top and branches below, this pepal tree is ancient'. 
`यजुर् वेद` `[yajur veda]` , 1-11-5
 says 'The person who knows the pepal tree well - with the roots above and branches below - is the one who knows'.

Its roots are said to be at the top, since the universe started with Brahma at the top. Brahma is the principal architect who made the universe happen. The various beings of the universe - plants, microbes, birds, animals and so on - are of different types, classified as branches in the tree down below. We can't cut away the flow of material experiences as long as we ignore reality and remain attached. In this way, the tree, representing the material world, does not wear out. 

The leaves of this pepal tree are said to represent the Vedas. The Vedas specify the methods to achieve material goals like wealth and family. The world grows with these activities - hence the Vedas are like the leaves of this tree. The growth of a tree is due to the nourishment supplied by the leaves. 

The Vedas themselves specify the method to cut ourselves free from the tree that’s the material world. The person who knows such a pepal tree is the one who knows the Vedas. This person knows the nature of this tree, which must be cut. He also knows the method to cut his attachment to it. Hence, he is called 'the one who knows the Vedas'.


