## 15-7


```shloka-sa

ममैवाम्शो जीवलोके जीवभूतः सनातनः ।
मनः षष्ठानि इन्द्रियाणि प्रकृतिस्थानि कर्षति ॥ ७ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

mamaivAmzo jIvaloke jIvabhUtaH sanAtanaH |
manaH SaSThAni indriyANi prakRtisthAni karSati || 7 ||

```
`जीवलोके` `[jIvaloke]` In this material world, where every Self is bound in the environment, `सनातनः` `[sanAtanaH]` the ever-existing `जीवभूतः` `[jIvabhUtaH]` Self `मम अम्शः एव` `[mama amzaH eva]` is definitely a part of Me. `कर्षति` `[karSati]` It pulls together `षष्ठानि इन्द्रियाणि` `[SaSThAni indriyANi]` the six sense-organs `मनः` `[manaH]` along with the mind `प्रकृतिस्थानि` `[prakRtisthAni]` – all of them come from the environment.

In this manner, even though each ever-present Self is always a part of Me, it is enveloped by ignorance. This ignorance is in the form of all the deeds it has 
[committed](14-19.md#happenings)
 in the past. It is bound to the environment in various forms: being present in an ordinary human, a powerful one, or any suitable form that's made from the environment. Inside such a body, it pulls the six sense-organs together - the organs of sight, sound, smell, touch, taste and the mind.

Occasionally, one Self 
[frees](Back-to-Basics.md#Moksha)
 itself of ignorance in the manner described before. It then manifests in its true form.

Before this, the Self is bound in a body and has access to an extremely limited amount of knowledge. In this state, it is the owner of the five organs of sense and the mind - inside a body made from the environment, obtained according to past deeds. It attracts various experiences in-line with those deeds.


