## 15-8


```shloka-sa

शरीरम् यदवाप्नोति यच्चापि उत्क्रामतीश्वरः ।
गृहीत्व एतानि सम्याति वायुर्गन्धान् इवाशयात् ॥ ८ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

zarIram yadavApnoti yaccApi utkrAmatIzvaraH |
gRhItva etAni samyAti vAyurgandhAn ivAzayAt || 8 ||

```
`ईश्वरः` `[IzvaraH]` The owner `गृहीत्व एतानि` `[gRhItva etAni]` carries the essence `यत् शरीरम्` `[yat zarIram]` of the body `अवाप्नोति` `[avApnoti]` it gets to own, `यत् च` `[yat ca]` and the one that it `उत्क्रामति` `[utkrAmati]` leaves. `सम्याति` `[samyAti]` It departs `इव` `[iva]` like `वायुः` `[vAyuH]` the wind `गन्धान्` `[gandhAn]` that takes the fragrance `आशयात्` `[AzayAt]` from its source.

_In this Shloka, a difference is made in the body we enter at birth and the one that we leave at death, since those are not the same. Consider this - We are a single cell at conception. This is followed by many cycles of new cells till we die._

The Self is the owner of its organs, made from solids, liquids, gasses, energy and space. It gets to own them in a body at the time of birth and leaves a body when it dies. It carries the essence of its organs and departs. 

This is compared to the wind, which takes the fragrance from its source. Fragrant things such as a garland, sandal and musk contain fragrance. The wind carries that subtle smell from the source to another place. The Self carries the essence of the organs in the same way.

_The 'essence of the organ' is the sense of experience that it gives. For example, an organ such as the ear gives experiences related to listening- like pleasurable and irritating sounds._

The organs involved are listed again by the Lord in the next Shloka -


