## 16-6


```shloka-sa

द्वा भूतसर्गौ लोकेऽस्मिन् दैव असुर एव च ।
दैवो विस्तरशः प्रोक्तः आसुरम् पार्थ मे शृणु ॥ ६ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

dvA bhUtasargau loke'smin daiva asura eva ca |
daivo vistarazaH proktaH Asuram pArtha me zRNu || 6 ||

```
`अस्मिन् लोके` `[asmin loke]` In this world, `द्वा भूतसर्गौ` `[dvA bhUtasargau]` two types of beings take form - `दैव` `[daiva]` those who 
[intend to comply to My instructions](Chapter_16.md#deva_asura) `असुर` `[asura]` and those who 
[don't](Chapter_16.md#deva_asura)
. `दैवो` `[daivo]` The property of compliance `प्रोक्तः` `[proktaH]` was described `विस्तरशः` `[vistarazaH]` in an elaborate manner. `पार्थ` `[pArtha]` Arjuna, `शृणु` `[zRNu]` listen `आसुरम्` `[Asuram]` to the 
[property of non-compliance](Chapter_16.md#deva_asura) `मे` `[me]` from Me.

This world is a world of action - all beings here are involved in activities. They commit virtue and vice over many lives. At the time of creation, they come into being in two attitudes - the attitude of compliance to the Lord's instructions and the attitude of non-compliance. 

Under the influence of virtue and vice committed over the ages, they are individually prone to follow the Lord's instructions, or to break them.



<a name='applnote_203'></a>
> Our attitudes are an effect of deeds we committed in the past.



The asset of compliance to the Lord’s instruction was elaborated before. The Lord continues- Those with this asset are born to a certain behavior and conduct, according to 
[My principles](16-1_to_16-3.md)
. Such conduct has been elaborated in the form of 
[karmayOga](2-40.md#karmayoga)
, 
[jnAnayOga](3-3.md#jnAnayOga_a_defn)
 and 
[bhaktiyOga](Chapter_7.md#bhakti_a_defn)
.

Those with the intent to break the Lord's instructions are born into different behavior and conduct. Be with Me and listen to that.


