## 17-8


```shloka-sa

आयुः सत्व बलारोग्य सुख प्रीति विवर्धनः ।
रस्याः स्निग्धाः स्थिरा हृद्या आहाराः सात्त्विक प्रियाः ॥ ८ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

AyuH satva balArogya sukha prIti vivardhanaH |
rasyAH snigdhAH sthirA hRdyA AhArAH sAttvika priyAH || 8 ||

```
`प्रियाः आहाराः` `[priyAH AhArAH]` The favorite food `सात्त्विक` `[sAttvika]` of people in the 
[sattva](14-6.md#sattva)
 quality `विवर्धनः` `[vivardhanaH]` enhances `आयुः` `[AyuH]` longevity; `सत्व` `[satva]` it enhances the mind, `बल` `[bala]` its strength, `आरोग्य` `[Arogya]` health, `सुख` `[sukha]` well-being `प्रीति` `[prIti]` and love. `रस्याः` `[rasyAH]` They are tasty, `स्निग्धाः` `[snigdhAH]` being mild and smooth, `स्थिराः` `[sthirAH]` preserving `हृद्याः` `[hRdyAH]` and provide comfort to the mind.


<a name='applnote_209'></a>
> Food builds our body and the qualities in it.



Those who have chosen to be in 
[sattva](14-6.md#sattva)
 prefer food that is made in the quality of 
[sattva](14-6.md#sattva)
. Any food made in 
[sattva](14-6.md#sattva)
 contributes to longevity, further enhancing the quality of 
[sattva](14-6.md#sattva)
. 

[Sattva](14-6.md#sattva)
 is the seat of thought and experience. The knowledge that contributes to the realization of our Self is called 
[sattva](14-6.md#sattva)
 here. It was said in [14-17](14-17.md): ‘From 
[sattva](14-6.md#sattva)
, knowledge arises’. Since 
[sattva](14-6.md#sattva)
 causes knowledge to be enriched, food that is made in 
[sattva](14-6.md#sattva)
 also contributes to enriching our knowledge. 

Further, it enhances strength and keeps us healthy. It brings love and well-being as well - When it is digested in the body, it automatically contributes to our well-being. Then, by initiating work that brings love, it enhances love too. 

Such food is tasty - having fluids that are pleasant to taste. They are mild and smooth - buttery for example. They are preserving - their effect on us is stable. They provide comfort to the mind - they are pleasing to the eyes. A person in 
[sattva](14-6.md#sattva)
 prefers these foods, which are made in the quality of 
[sattva](14-6.md#sattva)
.


