## 18-61


```shloka-sa

ईश्वरः सर्व भूतानाम् हृद्देशे अर्जुन तिष्ठति ।
भ्रामयन् सर्व भूतानि यन्त्रारूढानि मायया ॥ ६१ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

IzvaraH sarva bhUtAnAm hRddeze arjuna tiSThati |
bhrAmayan sarva bhUtAni yantrArUDhAni mAyayA || 61 ||

```
`अर्जुन` `[arjuna]` Arjuna, `ईश्वरः` `[IzvaraH]` the Supreme Lord `तिष्ठति` `[tiSThati]` sits `हृद्देशे` `[hRddeze]` at the heart `सर्व भूतानाम्` `[sarva bhUtAnAm]` of every being, `भ्रामयन्` `[bhrAmayan]` spinning `सर्व भूतानि` `[sarva bhUtAni]` all beings, `यन्त्रारूढानि` `[yantrArUDhAni]` mounting them in the mechanism `मायया` `[mAyayA]` of the environment.

The Supreme Lord controls everything by His very nature. He is Lord Krishna. He is at the heart of every being - Knowledge and consciousness arise at the place where He is situated, the source of activity and control. 

In what way is He situated in there? What does He do there? 

He sits there, spinning all beings by mounting them in the mechanism of the environment. 

Meaning - The Lord Himself has established the mechanism of our body and its organs. All beings are mounted in such a mechanism, made from what we call the environment. 

The Lord stays at the heart of all beings and keeps them going according to their qualities, using the experiences created by 
[sattva](14-6.md#sattva)
, 
[rajas](14-7.md#rajas)
 and 
[tamas](14-8.md#tamas)
. These qualities are in the environment. This environment belongs to the Lord Himself.

As said before in [15-15](15-15.md): 'I am at the heart of everything. Knowledge, memory and the ability to reason come from Me', in [10-8](10-8.md): 'Every entity gets stimulated and initiates action by Me' and in scriptures such as `बृहदारण्यक` [bRhadAraNyaka], 3.7.22: 'The One who is situated in the Self'.

Now, The Lord describes the means to achieve freedom from these experiences.


