## 2-11


```shloka-sa

अशोच्यान् अन्वशोचस्त्वम् प्रज्ञावादाम् च भाषसे ।
गतासून् अगतासून् च नानुशोचन्ति पन्डिताः ॥ ११ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

azocyAn anvazocastvam prajJAvAdAm ca bhASase |
gatAsUn agatAsUn ca nAnuzocanti panDitAH || 11 ||

```
`त्वम्` `[tvam]` You `अन्वशोचः` `[anvazocaH]` feel sad `अशोच्यान्` `[azocyAn]` for things that you should not feel sorry about `प्रजआवादाम् च भाषसे` `[prajaAvAdAm ca bhASase]` and you speak supposedly enlightened words. `पन्डिताः` `[panDitAH]` Learned people `न अनुशोचन्ति` `[na anuzocanti]` do not feel sorry for `गतासून्` `[gatAsUn]` (temporary) bodies `अगतासून्` `[agatAsUn]` or the (everlasting) Self


<a name='applopener_17'></a>
> Why do I hesitate?



The Lord addresses Arjuna- ‘You feel sorrow for things that you don’t need to feel sorry about. You preach about the elders in the family dying and the ancestors losing their illustrious place ([1-42](1-26_to_1-47.md)). You say this out of a limited knowledge about the body and the Self. 

We don’t grieve in such a situation, when we know the real nature of the body (as temporary) and the Self (as everlasting). In the absence of this knowledge, contradictory thoughts arise in you - sorrowful thoughts like ‘Must I kill them’ on one side; preaching of duty and doing the ‘right’ thing on the other. 



<a name='applnote_18'></a>
> Hesitation happens when you mix-up the Self with your body and the rest of the environment.



In reality, a sense of duty and righteousness follows from the knowledge that the body is distinct from your Self. You do not know the real nature of your body, nor do you know about your Self. 

The Self is separate from the body and is ever-lasting. You don’t know that performing duties (such as war) is a method to realize your Self. Fighting this war without attachment to its outcome is a way to realize the true nature of your Self. 

Your Self does not depend on birth to exist, nor is it compelled by death to be destroyed. Your Self does not have birth and death. Thus, the Self is not something to feel sorry about.

Your body is without consciousness and has an end by its very nature. It’s natural that it is born and that it dies; the body is also not something to feel sorry about. That's the opinion of the Shloka.

First, listen to the nature of your Self.


