## 2-27


```shloka-sa

जातस्य हि ध्रुवो मृत्युः ध्रुवम् जन्म मृतस्य च ।
तस्मादपरिहार्येऽर्थे न त्वम् शोचितुमर्हसि ॥ २७ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

jAtasya hi dhruvo mRtyuH dhruvam janma mRtasya ca |
tasmAdaparihArye'rthe na tvam zocitumarhasi || 27 ||

```
`मृत्युः ध्रुवो हि` `[mRtyuH dhruvo hi]` Just as death is definite `जातस्य` `[jAtasya]` for one who is born, `ध्रुवम् जन्म` `[dhruvam janma]` birth (in another form) is definite `मृतस्य च` `[mRtasya ca]` for one who is dead. `तस्मात्` `[tasmAt]` Hence, `अपरिहार्ये अर्थे` `[aparihArye arthe]` this inevitable phenomenon `त्वम् शोचितुम् न अर्हसि` `[tvam zocitum na arhasi]` does not qualify as something for you to feel sorry about.

The destruction of anything that's born is certain - This inevitability is evident. 

Also, it is inevitable that something that has been destroyed comes into existence. How is it possible, that something that has been destroyed is born again? 

To answer the question, consider this: For things that are perceived to exist, their creation is evident. For things that don’t seem to exist, it’s not evident. Terms like creation and destruction describe different states of an object that has existence. 

As an analogy, things that do exist, such as threads, when put together, form something that’s called cloth. The same thing applies even to things that don't seem to exist - The thread changed its context, it did not cease to exist.

When things like clothes are created, nothing else is observed, except that threads are put together in a pattern. Merely by a transaction, or by using a different name, or by using it for a different purpose, the thought that new matter has been created is not appropriate. Thus, things like creation and destruction are different states of an existing object. 

'Destruction' is said to happen when an object, which is in the state called 'created', obtains a state that seems opposite to its created state. For example, mud can exist in different states such as 'dough-like-mass', as a 'pot', as ‘pieces’ and as ‘powder’. 

In the same manner, any object that’s affected by its environment inevitably undergoes a series of transformations. For an object that exists in a certain state, obtaining the next state is its destruction. For the object in the succeeding state, obtaining that state itself is its creation. Thus, it’s inevitable that any object that's affected by its environment undergoes a series of creations and destructions: There is no need to feel sorry about this.

Even the slightest sorrow that may arise on seeing an object change from one state to another does not arise in the case of humans and other beings – The Lord states that next.


