## 2-41


```shloka-sa

व्यवसायात्मिका बुद्धिरेकेह कुरुनन्दन ।
बहुशाखा ह्यनन्ताश्च बुद्धयोऽव्यवसायिनाम् ॥ ४१ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

vyavasAyAtmikA buddhirekeha kurunandana |
bahuzAkhA hyanantAzca buddhayo'vyavasAyinAm || 41 ||

```
`कुरुनन्दन` `[kurunandana]` Arjuna, `इह` `[iha]` here, `बुद्धिः` `[buddhiH]` the intention `व्यवसायात्मिका` `[vyavasAyAtmikA]` that perseveres to determine the nature of the Self `एका हि` `[ekA hi]` is indeed one. `अव्यवसायिनाम्` `[avyavasAyinAm]` Those that do not have such determination `बहुशाखाः` `[bahuzAkhAH]` are of many types `अनन्ताः च` `[anantAH ca]` and innumerable.

The Lord says 'Here, the intention that perseveres to determine the nature of the Self is indeed one'. The word 'here' refers to the entire field of conscious activities. In this field, He says 'the intention that perseveres to determine the nature of the Self is indeed one'- meaning, the intention of a person who works to attain 
[moksha](Back-to-Basics.md#Moksha)
 is an intent that has determination. The determination is to ascertain the true nature of the Self. 

On the other hand, actions that are driven by desires are without such resolve. When we are driven by desires, it's just beneficial to know the distinction between the body and the Self. It’s not necessary to realize the true nature of the Self. Even without ascertaining the real nature of the Self, it's possible to ask for desirable things, achieve them and enjoy them- there is nothing to oppose this.

The 'focused intention to achieve liberation' is said to be ‘one’, by virtue of having a single goal. A person who has the determination to achieve liberation would initiate all activity for the one end-result called 
[moksha](Back-to-Basics.md#Moksha)
. Hence, given the same wisdom behind these activities, there is a single intent that drives all the actions. 

As an analogy, take the intention to make money for the sake of money itself. There may be many different activities that can make money. The wisdom driving those activities is the practical awareness of capital. The intention behind all those activities is the same.

People without the determination to achieve liberation are ruled by actions to achieve various outcomes, such as children, wealth, food or a place in heaven. Due to the countless variety of outcomes, the intentions that drive those actions are uncountable as well. Also, they branch out variously in the form of differences and side-effect within the same goal. Hence, the intentions of people who do not have such determination have many branches and are countless.



<a name='applnote_38'></a>
> It doesn’t really matter what drives your action; Do it for the Lord.



This is the summary: Give up all outcomes that are said to be obtained from daily activities. Involve in all activity with the same wisdom – the practical awareness that work is done for the sake of the Lord. Have 
[moksha](Back-to-Basics.md#Moksha)
 as the only goal. Even in case of actions driven by desire, done in accordance with your occupation, give up the outcomes associated with them. They are to be done according to your capability along with your daily activities, for the purpose of attaining 
[moksha](Back-to-Basics.md#Moksha)
.

In the next three Shlokas, the Lord criticizes those who perform desire-driven activities with attachment towards their outcomes.


