## 2-49


```shloka-sa

दूरेण ह्यवरम् कर्म बुद्धियोगात् धनन्जय ।
बुद्धौ शरणमन्विच्छ कृपणाः फलहेतवः ॥४९ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

dUreNa hyavaram karma buddhiyogAt dhananjaya |
buddhau zaraNamanviccha kRpaNAH phalahetavaH ||49 ||

```
`धनन्जय` `[dhananjaya]` Arjuna, `कर्म` `[karma]` ordinary, desire-driven actions `दूरेण हि अवरम्` `[dUreNa hi avaram]` are highly inferior to `बुद्धियोगात्` `[buddhiyogAt]` actions done with the knowledge of the Self, without attachment to outcomes. `शरणम् अन्विच्छ` `[zaraNam anviccha]` Take refuge `बुद्दौ` `[buddau]` in that knowledge. `फलहेतवः` `[phalahetavaH]` Those who think that they cause the outcomes `कृपणाः` `[kRpaNAH]` are to be pitied.

<a name='buddhiyOga_a_defn'></a>
Performing with an awareness of the Self is called 
`बुद्धियोग` `[buddhiyoga]`
. It is explained as the awareness that lets us give up the final outcome of any activity, along with any success or failure experienced before it’s complete. 

When compared to such activities, others are by far inferior. The two types of activities are indeed very distinct. When you are aware of the Self while working, you get rid of all misfortune present in the material world. This path leads to 
[moksha](Back-to-Basics.md#Moksha)
, the ultimate goal. 

The other kind of action (driven by desire) will result in the same material world, leading to sorrow. Hence, take refuge in the knowledge of the Self while performing your actions: Trust and be situated in the awareness of the Self. 

'Those who think that they cause the outcomes are to be pitied': Those who work while being attached to its outcome will remain in the material world - they are to be pitied.



<a name='applopener_42'></a>
> Why know the Self?
