## 2-61


```shloka-sa

तानि सर्वाणि सम्यम्य युक्त आसीत मत्परः ।
वशे हि यस्येन्द्रियाणि तस्य प्रज्ञा प्रतिष्ठिता ॥ ६१ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

tAni sarvANi samyamya yukta AsIta matparaH |
vaze hi yasyendriyANi tasya prajJA pratiSThitA || 61 ||

```
`युक्तः` `[yuktaH]` The focused person `सम्यम्य` `[samyamya]` balances `तानि सर्वाणि` `[tAni sarvANi]` all of them and `आसीत` `[AsIta]` needs to stay `मत्परः` `[matparaH]` devoted to Me. `इन्द्रियाणि यस्य वशे हि` `[indriyANi yasya vaze hi]` Only a person with control over his sense organs `तस्य प्रज्ञा प्रतिष्ठिता` `[tasya prajJA pratiSThitA]` has 
[steadfast consciousness](2-53.md#sthitaprajna_xlat)
.

The person who wishes to get out of the cycle must control his sense organs - which is a difficult thing to do, due to his desire for sensual objects. He must focus his mind on Me and be content. 

I am a very favorable refuge for all conscious beings. All flaws in the mind are cleared entirely when it indulges in My thought. Thus purified, the mind gets free of its desire for sensual objects and brings the sense organs under its control. 

In this way, a mind gains control over the sense organs and qualifies to realize the Self. As said in the 
`विश्नुपुरान` `[viznupurAna]` , 6-7-74:
 ‘Like a bright fire combines with the wind to burn down dry wood, Vishnu is situated in your consciousness and destroys all the flaws of His devotees’

This Shloka concludes with the statement- ‘Only a person with control over his sense organs has 
[steadfast consciousness](2-53.md#sthitaprajna_xlat)
‘.



<a name='applnote_45'></a>
> It isn’t possible to experience the Self without placing ourselves in the refuge of the Lord.



In the next two Shlokas, the Lord says that without placing the mind in Him, a person who tries to control his sense organs on his own will see his efforts end in vain.


