## 2-62 to 2-63


```shloka-sa

ध्यायतो विषयान् पुम्सः सङ्गस्तेषूपजायते ।
सङ्गात् सन्जायते कामः कामात् क्रोधोभिजायते ॥ ६२ ॥
क्रोधात् भवति सम्मोहः स्म्मोहात् स्मृतिविभ्रमः ।
स्मृतिभ्रम्शात् बुद्धिनाशः बुद्धिनाशात् प्रणश्यति ॥ ६३ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

dhyAyato viSayAn pumsaH saGgasteSUpajAyate |
saGgAt sanjAyate kAmaH kAmAt krodhobhijAyate || 62 ||
krodhAt bhavati sammohaH smmohAt smRtivibhramaH |
smRtibhramzAt buddhinAzaH buddhinAzAt praNazyati || 63 ||

```
`पुम्सः` `[pumsaH]` The one who `ध्यायतः` `[dhyAyataH]` immerses his mind in `विषयान्` `[viSayAn]` sensual objects `उपजायते` `[upajAyate]` will develop `सङ्गः` `[saGgaH]` attachment `तेषु` `[teSu]` with them. `सङ्गात्` `[saGgAt]` From attachment `सन्जायते` `[sanjAyate]` arises `कामः` `[kAmaH]` desire. `कामात्` `[kAmAt]` From desire, `क्रोधः` `[krodhaH]` anger `अभिजायते` `[abhijAyate]` is born. `क्रोधात्` `[krodhAt]` From anger, `सम्मोहः` `[sammohaH]` delusion `भवति` `[bhavati]` happens. `सम्मोहात्` `[sammohAt]` Due to delusion, `स्मृति विभ्रमः` `[smRti vibhramaH]` thought and understanding are destroyed. `स्मृतिभ्रम्शात्` `[smRtibhramzAt]` Since thought and understanding are destroyed, `बुद्धिनाशः` `[buddhinAzaH]` the intellect perishes. `प्रणश्यति` `[praNazyati]` The person is wasted, `बुद्धिनाशात्` `[buddhinAzAt]` once his intellect is gone.

A person who does not focus his mind on Me wouldn’t have lost his desire for sensual objects yet. Even when he controls his sense organs, he will definitely indulge in thoughts about sensual objects. This indulgence comes from the influence of infinite actions. He has committed these actions since beginning-less time, all the while being driven by the desire for outcomes.

When he indulges in thoughts about sensory objects, he will grow a strong attachment towards them again. From that attachment, desire is born - the ripening of attachment is called desire. Desire is a state in which a person is unable to stay without experiencing things that stimulate the sense organs. 

From this desire, anger is born. There will be a time when a person is denied something he desires. Then, he feels that others are responsible and throws his anger at them. It’s a feeling like ‘Due to them, I don’t have what I like’.

Anger results in delusion- being insensitive to what must be done and what must not. Due to this delusion, a person may do anything at all - the awareness involved in controlling his sense organs and other activities is lost. Due to loss of such understanding, the intellect perishes. 

The focus that he brought about to gain realization of the Self is destroyed. Due to the loss of such intellect, he falls back to material things and is wasted.


