## 2-72


```shloka-sa

एषा ब्राह्मी स्थितिः पार्थ नैनम् प्राप्य विमुह्यति ।
स्थित्वा अस्याम् अन्तकालेऽपि बह्मनिर्वाणमृच्छति ॥ ७२ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

eSA brAhmI sthitiH pArtha nainam prApya vimuhyati |
sthitvA asyAm antakAle'pi bahmanirvANamRcchati || 72 ||

```
`पार्थ` `[pArtha]` Arjuna, `एषा` `[eSA]` this is `ब्राह्मी स्थितिः` `[brAhmI sthitiH]` a state, which leads you to realize your Self. `न विमुह्यति` `[na vimuhyati]` You will not get carried away by material things `एनम् प्राप्य` `[enam prApya]` after attaining this state. `अस्याम् स्थित्वा` `[asyAm sthitvA]` If a person is in this state `अन्तकालेऽपि` `[antakAle'pi]` even at his final moment, `ऋच्छति` `[Rcchati]` he realizes `निर्वाणम् ब्रह्म` `[nirvANam brahma]` the Self, full of joy.

The 'state of being' in which you work without attachment is the foundation for gaining eternal knowledge of the Self. This state of being is a property of the person who is 
[free of confusion](2-53.md#sthitaprajna_xlat)
. 

You will not get carried away by material things after attaining this state of being, performing actions without attachment. Even if you achieve this state at the end of your lifetime, you will attain the Self. You will realize the Self as having joy itself as its characteristic.

Thus, in the second chapter, Arjuna was taught the knowledge of the eternal Self. Before this, he did not know the real nature of the Self. He also didn’t know that action in war can achieve the realization of the Self. With the misconception that the body is the Self, he was about to withdraw from the war. 

As a foundation to gain knowledge and get rid of the misconception, Lord Krishna taught him the technique of 
[Karmayoga](Back-to-Basics.md#karmayOga_a_defn) - performing actions without attachment. It is a means to achieve 
[freedom from confusion](2-53.md#sthitaprajna_xlat)
.

In summary: To resolve Arjuna's confusion, the second chapter described the knowledge required to realize the eternal Self. It also gives the knowledge required to work without attachments. The aim of this knowledge is to be 
[firm in wisdom](2-53.md#sthitaprajna_xlat)
.


