## 3-31


```shloka-sa

ये मे मतमिदम् नित्यम् अनुतिष्टन्ति मानवाः ।
श्रद्धावन्तः अनसूयन्तः मुच्यन्ते ते अपि कर्मभिः ॥ ३१ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

ye me matamidam nityam anutiSTanti mAnavAH |
zraddhAvantaH anasUyantaH mucyante te api karmabhiH || 31 ||

```
`ये मानवाः` `[ye mAnavAH]` People who `नित्यम् अनुतिष्टन्ति` `[nityam anutiSTanti]` constantly practice `इदम् मे मतम्` `[idam me matam]` [this principle of mine](3-30.md#principle_of_the_lord)
, `श्रद्धावन्तः` `[zraddhAvantaH]` those who believe in it, `अनसूयन्तः` `[anasUyantaH]` and those who do not find fault in this principle - `ते अपि` `[te api]` all of them `कर्मभिः मुच्यन्ते` `[karmabhiH mucyante]` will be free from the influence of their actions.

We are bound to our limitations due to actions we’ve committed since eternity. 



<a name='applnote_65'></a>
> Even if we don’t live this all the time, it is still sufficient to simply accept His existence.



There are people who master the scriptures and recognize that 
[My principle](3-30.md#principle_of_the_lord)
 is their essence. They practice My principle diligently and will be free of all this bondage. Others who believe in 
[this principle](3-30.md#principle_of_the_lord)
 but don’t practice it will be free as well. Yet others who do not resent and find fault in 
[this principle](3-30.md#principle_of_the_lord)
 will also be free.

The phrase ‘all of them’ in this Shloka signifies that they are all different types of people – those who practice, those who simply believe and those who don’t resent. All of them will lose their misfortune and will end up practicing 
[this principle](3-30.md#principle_of_the_lord)
 soon. They all attain 
[moksha](Back-to-Basics.md#Moksha)
.

In the next Shloka, The Lord explains the flaw in those who resent 
[The Lord's principle](3-30.md#principle_of_the_lord)
, do not believe in it and those who have no intention of following it.


