## 3-35


```shloka-sa

श्रेयान् स्वधर्मो विगुणः परधर्मात् स्वनुष्ठितात् ।
स्वधर्मे निधनम् श्रेयः परधर्मो भयावहः ॥ ३५ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

zreyAn svadharmo viguNaH paradharmAt svanuSThitAt |
svadharme nidhanam zreyaH paradharmo bhayAvahaH || 35 ||

```
`स्वधर्मः` `[svadharmaH]` Your natural conduct, `विगुणः` `[viguNaH]` even though lacking in great qualities, `श्रेयः` `[zreyaH]` is better `परधर्मात्` `[paradharmAt]` than performing something that's alien to your nature, `स्वनुष्ठितात्` `[svanuSThitAt]` even if it's performed well. `निधनम्` `[nidhanam]` Death `स्वधर्मे` `[svadharme]` while performing your duty `श्रेयः` `[zreyaH]` is desirable. `परधर्मः` `[paradharmaH]` Duties alien to your nature `भयावहः` `[bhayAvahaH]` are scary.

Working without attachment is your natural duty and is easily possible. It is preferred, even though it may feel worthless. That's because such actions are free from fault.

On the other hand, the process of realizing the Self by meditation is a struggle for someone who is in this environment. Though it may seem glorious, it has a high chance of divergence. It can only be practiced during a limited period of time.



<a name='applnote_68'></a>
> Work according to your nature. Don’t be anxious about your goal. Your work will continue.



While working without attachments, if a person passes away before realizing the Self in his current life, this practice continues unperturbed in his next life. 

For a person who is in touch with this world, it isn’t possible to realize the Self all by himself. Such an attempt is alien to his nature and is scary.

_Earlier in this chapter, [3-12](3-12.md) and the following Shlokas stated that the body is not owned or controlled by us. Thinking that we can control it is alien to our being. This is revisited in [18-47](18-47_first_part.md) too._


