## 3-37


```shloka-sa

श्री भगवान् उवाच -
काम एष क्रोध एष रजोगुण समुद्भवः ।
महाशनो महा पाप्मा विद्धि एनम् इह वैरिणम् ॥ ३७ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

zrI bhagavAn uvAca -
kAma eSa krodha eSa rajoguNa samudbhavaH |
mahAzano mahA pApmA viddhi enam iha vairiNam || 37 ||

```
`श्री भगवान् उवाच` `[zrI bhagavAn uvAca]` Lord Krishna said- `कामः एषः` `[kAmaH eSaH]` One reason is desire, `एषः क्रोधः` `[eSaH krodhaH]` the other reason is anger. `रजोगुण समुद्भवः` `[rajoguNa samudbhavaH]` They arise out of the quality of 
[rajas](2-45_to_2-46.md#satva_rajas_tamas)
. `महाशनः` `[mahAzanaH]` Desire is insatiable - it eats a lot out of you. `महा पाप्मा` `[mahA pApmA]` It makes you wrong and causes guilt. `एनम् इह वैरिनम् विद्धि` `[enam iha vairinam viddhi]` Know it as your enemy here.

A person who has embarked on the journey to realize the Self is still in contact with the material world. This world is pervaded by the 
[three qualities](2-45_to_2-46.md#satva_rajas_tamas)
 and is subject to creation and destruction. 
[The quality of rajas](2-45_to_2-46.md#satva_rajas_tamas)
 triggers desire. This makes a person yearn for experiences that stimulate his sense organs. This quality is accumulated due to activity committed over 
[beginning-less time](Back-to-Basics.md#beginningless_time)
. 

It is an insatiable enemy, which pulls a person towards the experiences of the material world. This desire turns into anger when the desired experience is blocked. Anger is directed towards people who are perceived to block the experience. This will compel a person to act against other people. 



<a name='applnote_70'></a>
> Recognize desire as the cause of regret and guilt. It blocks your destiny. Look beyond desire.



Desire, which arises from the quality of passion, is quite common; it is the one that blocks the realization of the Self.


