## 4-11


```shloka-sa

यो यथा माम् प्रपद्यन्ते तान् तथैव भजाम्यहम् ।
मम वर्त्मानुवर्तन्ते मनुष्याः पार्थ सर्वशः ॥ ११ ॥
```
```shloka-sa-hk

yo yathA mAm prapadyante tAn tathaiva bhajAmyaham |
mama vartmAnuvartante manuSyAH pArtha sarvazaH || 11 ||
```
`यो` `[yo]` Whoever `माम् प्रपद्यन्ते` `[mAm prapadyante]` surrenders and takes refuge in Me `यथा` `[yathA]` in any way, `भजामि तान्` `[bhajAmi tAn]` I will adore them `तथैव` `[tathaiva]` in the same way. `पार्थ` `[pArtha]` Arjuna, `मनुष्याः` `[manuSyAH]` people `अनुवर्तन्ते` `[anuvartante]` will follow `मम वर्त्म` `[mama vartma]` My path `सर्वशः` `[sarvazaH]` in every way.


<a name='applnote_77'></a>
> I am easily grasped in any form you expect.



To protect those who want to take refuge in Me, I take the form of a man, a power or something else. That’s not the only thing I do. I also adore those who want to surrender and take refuge in Me. I show myself in a way that’s according to their expectation, as they picture Me in their mind.

There’s no need to elaborate the ease with which a person can experience Me. It’s very simple- All people who intend to follow Me will follow My path and experience Me. I am not expressible by speech or thought, even to those who practice the rigor of following Me. Yet, they will experience Me with sense organs such as their eyes- in all places and in all ways that they expect. In this way, they will follow Me.

Now, having completed the description of His incarnations, He explains that knowledge is embedded in all actions that are done without attachments (i.e., in 
[Karmayoga](2-40.md#karmayoga)
). In the next Shloka, He says that people who practice such actions are rare.


