## 4-28


```shloka-sa

द्रव्य यज्ञास्तपो यज्ञाः योग यज्ञास्तथापरे ।
स्वाध्याय ज्ञान यज्ञाश्च यतयः सम्शित व्रताः ॥ २८ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

dravya yajJAstapo yajJAH yoga yajJAstathApare |
svAdhyAya jJAna yajJAzca yatayaH samzita vratAH || 28 ||

```
`अपरे` `[apare]` Others `द्रव्य यज्ञाः` `[dravya yajJAH]` worship using material things, `तपोयज्ञाः` `[tapoyajJAH]` some worship through penance, `तथा योगयज्ञाः` `[tathA yogayajJAH]` and some worship by reaching a destination. `स्वाध्याय ज्ञान यज्ञाः च` `[svAdhyAya jJAna yajJAH ca]` Yet others worship by studying the scriptures and understanding the meaning contained in them. `यतयः सम्शित व्रताः` `[yatayaH samzita vratAH]` All of them are dedicated and have firm focus.


<a name='applnote_89'></a>
> Working, offering something, breathing, self-control: each one is a form of worship.



Other people commit themselves to work without being driven by outcomes. They practice the 
[worship](3-9.md#yajna)
 of the divine Lord by offering material things, which are earned in a just manner. Some do it by donating things, some others by performing 
`याग` `[yAga]` - ceremonies in which contributions are gifted to others. Some do it through 
`होम` `[homa]` - offerings in fire. All these are methods to worship using material things.

Yet others practice devotion through penance- for example, by fasting in various ways. Some do it by reaching a certain destination– a place of worship (The word 
`योग` `[yoga]`
 is used in this Shloka to indicate this particular variety of 
[karmayOga](2-40.md#karmayoga)
, accomplished by reaching a place of worship). Some of them apply themselves to a study of the scriptures, while some focus on realizing the meaning contained in there.

All of them are dedicated people. They are said to have firm focus.


