## 5-12


```shloka-sa

युक्तः कर्म फलम् त्यक्त्वा शान्तिम् आप्नोति नैष्ठिकीम् ।
अयुक्तः कामकारेण फले सक्तो निबध्यते ॥ १२ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

yuktaH karma phalam tyaktvA zAntim Apnoti naiSThikIm |
ayuktaH kAmakAreNa phale sakto nibadhyate || 12 ||

```
`युक्तः` `[yuktaH]` A person who is intent and engaged `कर्म फलम् त्यक्त्वा` `[karma phalam tyaktvA]` will give up the attachment to outcomes `आप्नोति` `[Apnoti]` and will obtain `नैष्ठिकीम् शान्तिम्` `[naiSThikIm zAntim]` the joy of experiencing the Self in its pure form. `अयुक्तः` `[ayuktaH]` A person who does not do this `फले सक्तः` `[phale saktaH]` is attached to the outcome of his activities. `कामकारेण` `[kAmakAreNa]` Being driven by desire, `निबध्यते` `[nibadhyate]` he is tied down to the stimuli of this world.

A person is tuned to the realization of the Self alone, when he isn't moved by any outcome other than the experience of the Self. He will work only to purify the Self. All other outcomes don't matter to him. He will attain eternal joy – the enduring bliss of experiencing the Self.

A person who doesn't work in this way is interested in all kinds of outcomes other than the realization of the Self. He has turned away from the goal of realizing his Self. Inspired by desire, he is attached to the outcomes of his activities. While doing his work in this way, he will be bound by his actions always. He will always be attached to the stimuli of this world.

In summary, it is said here that the purpose of your activity is only to relieve the Self of its binding. Don't be driven by expectations regarding the outcomes of your actions. Give up your actions in nature, which has taken the form of your organs.

Next, The Lord talks about giving up ‘doer-ship’ in the environment itself, a part of which is your body.


