## 5-13


```shloka-sa

सर्व कर्माणि मनसा संन्यस्यास्ते सुखम् वशी ।
नवद्वारे पुरे देही नैव कुर्वन् न कारयन् ॥ १३ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

sarva karmANi manasA saMnyasyAste sukham vazI |
navadvAre pure dehI naiva kurvan na kArayan || 13 ||

```
`संन्यस्य` `[saMnyasya]` Having given up `सर्व कर्माणि` `[sarva karmANi]` all actions `नवद्वारे पुरे` `[navadvAre pure]` in the city with nine gates (the body) `मनसा` `[manasA]` using the mind, `देही` `[dehI]` the Self, which is the owner of the body `वशी` `[vazI]` will control his organs `सुखम् आस्ते` `[sukham Aste]` and stay content `नैव कुर्वन् न कारयन्` `[naiva kurvan na kArayan]` without committing any action directly or indirectly.

_Actions​ are ‘committed’ when we work with the feeling of ‘I am the doer’, being driven by some desire. All that work is done by our body. This Shloka describes our body as a city - it's a complex ecosystem with specialized parts, It has nine opening 'gates' - two eyes, two nostrils, two ears, one mouth and the two excretory organs._

While working, the feeling that ‘I am the doer’ is due to the relationship with our body. That is in turn due to the actions of our Self, committed since ancient times.

When our mind is enlightened by this fact, we know that attachments are not in our true nature. The Self leaves all actions in the city with nine gates. With this, the Self stops struggling to stay within the refuge of the body. Realizing that it owns the body out of circumstance and not by nature, the Self remains content without committing the actions of the body.

In the next Shloka, the Lord clearly describes the state of being of the Self.


