## 5-19


```shloka-sa

इहैव तैर्जितः सर्गः येषाम् साम्ये स्थितम् मनः ।
निर्दोषम् हि समम् ब्रह्म तस्मात् ब्रह्मणि ते स्थिताः ॥ १९ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

ihaiva tairjitaH sargaH yeSAm sAmye sthitam manaH |
nirdoSam hi samam brahma tasmAt brahmaNi te sthitAH || 19 ||

```
`सर्गः` `[sargaH]` This material creation `जितः` `[jitaH]` has been conquered `इहैव` `[ihaiva]` here itself, `तैः` `[taiH]` by those `येषाम् मनः` `[yeSAm manaH]` whose minds `साम्ये स्थितम्` `[sAmye sthitam]` are situated in this equality. `निर्दोषम्` `[nirdoSam]` When devoid of faults, `ब्रह्म` `[brahma]` the Self `समम् हि` `[samam hi]` is indeed whole and complete. `तस्मात्` `[tasmAt]` Thus, `ते ब्रह्मणि स्थिताः` `[te brahmaNi sthitAH]` they are all situated in the Lord.

The phrase ‘here itself’ means ‘while being in the endeavor to achieve’. 

While still being in the endeavor to realize the Self and achieve 
[Moksha](Back-to-Basics.md#Moksha)
, the material world is conquered when the mind is situated in the equality of the Self in every being. The phrase ‘When devoid of faults’ denotes a state of being in which we are free from the limitations of this material world. 

In this state, the Self in each of us is whole and complete – the Self, in its pure form, devoid of the association with the material world, is equal to the Lord. ‘Being situated in the equality of the Self’ is the same as being situated in the Lord. In this way, they conquer the material world.

In summary, people who strive to recognize the equality of the Self in everyone are already liberated. They know that the Self in everyone has a form that’s pure and infinite knowledge.

The next Shloka describes the manner in which a person who 
[works without attachment](2-40.md#karmayoga)
 exists and matures the knowledge that manifests in the form of equality.


