## 5-3


```shloka-sa

ज्ञेयः स नित्य संन्यासी यो न द्वेष्टि न काङ्क्षति ।
निर्द्वन्द्वो हि महाबाहो सुखम् बन्धात् प्रमुच्यते ॥ ३ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

jJeyaH sa nitya saMnyAsI yo na dveSTi na kAGkSati |
nirdvandvo hi mahAbAho sukham bandhAt pramucyate || 3 ||

```
`महाबाहो` `[mahAbAho]` Arjuna, `यः` `[yaH]` The person who `न काङ्क्षति` `[na kAGkSati]` is not addicted to desires `न द्वेष्टि` `[na dveSTi]` and is not carried away by hatred – `सः` `[saH]` he `निर्द्वन्द्वः` `[nirdvandvaH]` has overcome dualities. `नित्यसंन्यासी ज्ञेयः` `[nityasaMnyAsI jJeyaH]` it is to be known, that he stays beyond desire. `सः हि` `[saH hi]` He alone `सुखम् प्रमुच्यते` `[sukham pramucyate]` is easily freed `बन्धात्` `[bandhAt]` from the limitations of this world.


<a name='applnote_95'></a>
> Working without being driven is the quickest way to look beyond desires.



The person who practices the technique of working without attachment is satisfied with the experience of the Self. This experience is embedded in the technique. He does not yearn for anything else. In the same way, he does not hate anything either. In this way, he tolerates all dualities (such as hot and cold, joy and sorrow). He is the one who has given up all worldly things – he alone is known to pursue the knowledge of the Self. That is equivalent to 
[contemplation](3-3.md#jnAnayOga_a_defn)
. He alone will be freed from worldly limitations with ease – due to his diligence in working without being driven by attachments.

In the next Shloka, the Lord says that the techniques of 
[contemplation](3-3.md#jnAnayOga_a_defn)
 and 
[activity](Back-to-Basics.md#karmayOga_a_defn)
 are mutually independent. They do not need each other to achieve their results.


