## 6-35 to 6-36


```shloka-sa

श्री भगवान् उवाच -
असम्शयम् महाबाहो मनो दुर्निग्रहम् चलम् ।
अभ्यासेन तु कौन्तेय वैराग्येण च गृह्यते ॥ ३५ ॥
असम्यतात्मना योगो दुष्ट्राप इति मे मतिः ।
वश्यात्मना तु यतता शक्योऽवाप्तुम् उपायतः ॥ ३६ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

zrI bhagavAn uvAca -
asamzayam mahAbAho mano durnigraham calam |
abhyAsena tu kaunteya vairAgyeNa ca gRhyate || 35 ||
asamyatAtmanA yogo duSTrApa iti me matiH |
vazyAtmanA tu yatatA zakyo'vAptum upAyataH || 36 ||

```
`श्री भगवान् उवाच` `[zrI bhagavAn uvAca]` Lord Krishna said: `महाबाहो` `[mahAbAho]` O one with powerful arms, `असम्शयम्` `[asamzayam]` there is no doubt that `मनो` `[mano]` the mind `चलम्` `[calam]` keeps wandering `दुर्निग्रहम्` `[durnigraham]` and is difficult to control. `तु` `[tu]` However, `कौन्तेय` `[kaunteya]` Arjuna, `अभ्यासेन` `[abhyAsena]` by practice `वैराग्येण च` `[vairAgyeNa ca]` and by preventing oneself from being driven by desire, `गृह्यते` `[gRhyate]` it can be brought under our grip.
`असम्यतात्मना` `[asamyatAtmanA]` Someone who doesn’t​ have his mind under control `दुष्ट्राप` `[duSTrApa]` would find it impossible `योगो` `[yogo]` to pursue the Self - `इति मे मतिः` `[iti me matiH]` this is my opinion. `तु` `[tu]` On the other hand,`अवाप्तुम् शक्यः` `[avAptum zakyaH]` it is achievable `वश्यात्मना` `[vazyAtmanA]` by a person who has control, `यतता` `[yatatA]` who perseveres `उपायतः` `[upAyataH]` according to the described methods.


<a name='applnote_111'></a>
> Your intention to drive lets you stay in the [state of yoga](6-20_to_6-23.md#yoga_state_of_being).



Lord Krishna replies- No doubt, the mind is difficult to control. It wanders constantly by its very nature. Even then, it can be brought under control by the excellence of the Self – which results from the practice of its pure form and qualities. 

Moreover, attachment to things other than the Self leads to bondage. With this awareness, we get rid of the thirst for various desires. With this and a little effort from the intellect, the mind can be brought under our grip. 

The pursuit of the Self is indeed impossible – even with very heavy effort – if the mind is not under control. A person needs to bring his mind under control, persevering by the methods described before- being aware of the Self, 
[working independent of desire](2-40.md#karmayoga)
 to worship Me. 

With this, he gains the ability to practice 
[yoga](6-20_to_6-23.md#yoga_state_of_being)
. He gains the ability to see everything with equanimity.

Next, Arjuna requests to understand the greatness of 
[yoga](6-20_to_6-23.md#yoga_state_of_being)
 in its true nature, in the manner described in [2-40](2-40.md): ‘While working without attachment towards outcomes, something that has been started is not destroyed’. Over there, The Lord stated that the preferred means to realization is the 
[technique of working](2-40.md#karmayoga)
 without being driven. The knowledge of the Self is embedded in it. This greatness is the same as 
[the special state of being](6-20_to_6-23.md#yoga_state_of_being)
 described in this chapter.


