## 6-6


```shloka-sa

बन्धुरात्माऽत्मनस्तस्य येन आत्मैव आत्मना जितः ।
अनात्मनस्तु शत्रुत्वे वर्तेत् आत्मैव शत्रुवत् ॥ ६ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

bandhurAtmA'tmanastasya yena Atmaiva AtmanA jitaH |
anAtmanastu zatrutve vartet Atmaiva zatruvat || 6 ||

```
`तस्य आत्मनः आत्मा बन्धुः` `[tasya AtmanaH AtmA bandhuH]` The intentions of a being are favorable `येन आत्मैव जितः` `[yena Atmaiva jitaH]` when his own mind and intentions have been won over `आत्मना` `[AtmanA]` by the Self in him. `अनात्मनस्तु` `[anAtmanastu]` However, to a person who has not won over his mind, `आत्मैव शत्रुवत्` `[Atmaiva zatruvat]` his very intentions stand as his foe `शत्रुत्वे वर्तेत` `[zatrutve varteta]` and remain to work against him.


<a name='applnote_105'></a>
> Driving or being driven – it’s your choice.



A person can win his mind from the material world using the native qualities of the Self. Then, his mind is his friend. 

On the other hand, a person who hasn’t won over his mind, who has not focused his mind on realizing the Self will have the mind opposing him, like it was his enemy. Such a mind will work to counter the achievement of knowledge and the ultimate bliss it brings.

This is told by Sri Parashara too, in 
`विश्णु पुरान` `[vizNu purAna]` , 6-7-28:
 ‘The mind with its intentions is the cause for a person’s bondage and liberation. Intentions that are tied to the material world lead to bondage. For 
[liberation](Back-to-Basics.md#Moksha)
, our intentions must be detached from the stimuli of the material world.’

Next, He describes the state-of-being that is suitable to start on the journey to realize the Self.


