## 8-3


```shloka-sa

श्री भगवान् उवाच -
अक्षरम् ब्रह्म परमम् स्वभावोऽध्यात्मम् उच्यते ।
भूत भावोद्भवकरो विसर्गः कर्म सन्ज्ञितः ॥ ३ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

zrI bhagavAn uvAca -
akSaram brahma paramam svabhAvo'dhyAtmam ucyate |
bhUta bhAvodbhavakaro visargaH karma sanjJitaH || 3 ||

```
`श्री भगवान् उवाच` `[zrI bhagavAn uvAca]` The Lord said- `ब्रह्म` `[brahma]` The 'self-existent' denotes `परमम्` `[paramam]` the one who is beyond everything, `अक्षरम्` `[akSaram]` who is unchanging. `अध्यात्मम्` `[adhyAtmam]` The phrase 'environment' `उच्यते` `[ucyate]` refers to `स्वभावः` `[svabhAvaH]` the nature of this material world. `विसर्गः` `[visargaH]` The act of creating, `भूत भावोद्भवकरः` `[bhUta bhAvodbhavakaraH]` which makes all beings and their experiences `कर्म सन्ज्ञितः` `[karma sanjJitaH]` is meant by the word 'activity'.

The ‘self-existent' is the one who is beyond this universe, the one who is unchanging, without destruction. It is the state of complete awareness. 

`सुबाल` `[subAla]` , 2
 says- The subtle rests in enlightenment. Enlightenment rests in what cannot be seen.



<a name='applnote_134'></a>
> Start by knowing the body of the Lord – The Self, the environment and its activities.



The state of ‘being beyond the universe’ and 'remaining ever-unchanged' constitute the state of the Self when it is dis-entangled from the material environment.

The 'environment' refers to the nature of this material world. This is the environment surrounding us - matter that is distinct from the Self, yet relates to the Self - consisting of all gross and subtle things and their influences. The fact that these are to be known is also mentioned in the 
`पन्चाग्नि विद्या` `[pancAgni vidyA]`
. 

A person desiring 
[Moksha](Back-to-Basics.md#Moksha)
 must know the environment as a set of things that can be acquired and given up.

The word 'activity' refers to the act of creating, which makes all beings and their experiences happen - such as the experiences that happen in a human body. A person who desires 
[Moksha](Back-to-Basics.md#Moksha)
 must know the act of creation that materialized these experiences. He must know other actions as well - which bring so much anxiety - and break free of their influence. 

Later in this chapter, the Lord says this about the pure experience of the Self: 'Yearning for which, people practice celibacy and study' [8-11](8-11.md) 


