## 9-12


```shloka-sa

मोघाशा मोघ कर्मणो मोघ ज्ञाना विचेतसः ।
राक्षसीम् आसुरीम् चैव प्रकृतिम् मोहिनीम् श्रिताः ॥ १२ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

moghAzA mogha karmaNo mogha jJAnA vicetasaH |
rAkSasIm AsurIm caiva prakRtim mohinIm zritAH || 12 ||

```
`श्रिताः` `[zritAH]` They remain inside `प्रकृतिम्` `[prakRtim]` this material world, `आसुरीम् मोहिनीम्` `[AsurIm mohinIm]` which advocates the enjoyment of everything that's attractive. `चैव राक्षसीम्` `[caiva rAkSasIm]` This world will definitely devour them. `विचेतसः` `[vicetasaH]` Without the ability to recognize reality, `मोघाशा` `[moghAzA]` they have useless desires, `मोघ कर्मणो` `[mogha karmaNo]` do useless activities `मोघ ज्ञाना` `[mogha jJAnA]` and have knowledge that's useless.


<a name='applnote_147'></a>
> Without knowing this reality, people go behind imaginary goals.



The material world conceals the supreme qualities of the Lord in His human form. His qualities, such as the abundance of compassion, aren’t apparent.

This world advocates the enjoyment of everything that's attractive and devours anyone who remains in it. People go behind useless desires - their wants lead them nowhere. They indulge in useless activities - they start work that is fruitless. 

They have knowledge that's useless. They observe moving and stationary objects that belong to Me. Due to the adverse nature of their knowledge, the understanding they gain is contrary to reality. Such knowledge does not yield anything. 

Without the ability to recognize reality, they are unable to learn the true nature of anything. They consider Me, the Lord of the universe, to be equivalent to others. With this conviction, whatever they set out to do in regard to Me will fail to yield anything.


