## 9-13


```shloka-sa

महात्मानस्तु माम् पार्थ दैवीम् प्रकृतिम् आश्रिताः ।
भजन्ति अनन्य मनसो ज्ञात्वा भूतादिम् अव्ययम् ॥ १३ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

mahAtmAnastu mAm pArtha daivIm prakRtim AzritAH |
bhajanti ananya manaso jJAtvA bhUtAdim avyayam || 13 ||

```
`तु` `[tu]` On the other hand, `पार्थ` `[pArtha]` Arjuna, `महात्मानः` `[mahAtmAnaH]` great people `दैवीम् प्रकृतिम् आश्रिताः` `[daivIm prakRtim AzritAH]` take refuge in My divine nature. `ज्ञात्वा` `[jJAtvA]` Knowing `माम्` `[mAm]` Me, `भूतादिम्` `[bhUtAdim]` the origin of all beings, `अव्ययम्` `[avyayam]` the One who never wears out, `भजन्ते` `[bhajante]` they worship Me `अनन्य मनसः` `[ananya manasaH]` without letting their minds wander among other subjects.


<a name='applnote_148'></a>
> Worship and take refuge in The Lord – He is everything.



People take refuge in Me. With many virtuous deeds, they get rid of all undesirable influences that come in the way of my refuge. They reside in the divine environment, knowing it to be one of My attributes. 

Such people are great and have realized their Self well. They know Me as the origin of all beings, the One who never wears out, as the One who is inaccessible to speech and thought. My form and deeds cannot be expressed by names. 

They know that I have stepped in as a human due to My vast compassion. They know I work for the protection of virtuous people. 

Knowing all of this, they worship Me. They have abundant affection for Me and don’t let their thoughts wander. They find it impossible to carry forward their thoughts, their Self and their activities without worshipping Me. They worship Me purely for the sake of worship.


