## 9-26


```shloka-sa

पत्रम् पुष्पम् फलम् तोयम् यो मे भक्त्या प्रयच्छति ।
तदहम् भक्त्युपहृतम् अश्नामि प्रयतात्मनः ॥ २६ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

patram puSpam phalam toyam yo me bhaktyA prayacchati |
tadaham bhaktyupahRtam aznAmi prayatAtmanaH || 26 ||

```
`यो` `[yo]` Anyone who `प्रयच्छति` `[prayacchati]` offers `पत्रम्` `[patram]` a leaf, `पुष्पम्` `[puSpam]` a flower, `फलम्` `[phalam]` , a fruit `तोयम्` `[toyam]` or water `मे` `[me]` to Me `भक्त्या` `[bhaktyA]` with devotion - `अहम्` `[aham]` I `अश्नामि` `[aznAmi]` will accept `तत्` `[tat]` whatever `भक्त्युपहृतम्` `[bhaktyupahRtam]` is offered with 
[devotion](Chapter_7.md#bhakti_a_defn) `प्रयतात्मनः` `[prayatAtmanaH]` by a person who is so dedicated to Me.

A devotee offers Me something with 
[devotion](Chapter_7.md#bhakti_a_defn)
. It could be anything that’s easily available – like a leaf, a flower, a fruit or water. Such a devotee has limitless affection towards Me and can’t sustain himself without offering things to Me. To this person, making the offering itself is the reward.

Even though I am the Lord of everything, though the lifecycle of the universe is My sport, though all My desires are always fulfilled and My intent always realized, though I exist with limitless and unbroken favorable qualities of infinite variety, though My nature is one of infinite amounts of continuous joy, I accept this offering.

In fact, I accept it with all eagerness; like I finally got something I yearned for, which was out of My reach. That’s because it was made with devotion, dedication and a pure mind, without any intention other than making the offering to Me.

As stated in 
`मोक्ष धर्म` `[mokSa dharma]` , 353-64:
 Being engaged in our work, with our intellect working towards a single goal (to attain the Supreme Lord), any actions performed are accepted with great regard by the Lord Himself.

Gifted people 
[who know Me](7-16.md#jnAnI)
 are special in a way that's not expressible by thought and speech. Be a 
[person who knows](7-16.md#jnAnI)
. Weigh down your Self and everything that’s yours with the weight of 
[devotion described before](Chapter_7.md#bhakti_a_defn)
. Indulge in praise, work, worship and respect without interruption. While indulging in them, do your work in this world as follows-


