## 9-27


```shloka-sa

यत् करोषि यत् अश्नासि जत् जुहोषि ददासि यत् ।
यत् तपस्यसि कौन्तेय तत् कुरुष्व मदर्पणम् ॥ २७ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

yat karoSi yat aznAsi jat juhoSi dadAsi yat |
yat tapasyasi kaunteya tat kuruSva madarpaNam || 27 ||

```
`यत् करोषि` `[yat karoSi]` Whatever you do, `यत् अश्नासि` `[yat aznAsi]` whatever you consume, `यत् जुहोषि` `[yat juhoSi]` whatever you sacrifice, `ददासि यत्` `[dadAsi yat]` whatever you give away, `यत् तपस्यसि` `[yat tapasyasi]` any thought you concentrate on, `तत् कुरुष्व` `[tat kuruSva]` make it `अर्पणम्` `[arpaNam]` a dedication `मत्` `[mat]` to Me

<a name='dedicate_actions_to_Krishna'></a>
The Lord states- ‘Dedicate everything to Me. That includes any remaining activities you do in this world till you depart from your body. Your daily routine, your responsibilities such as charity, focus and sacrifice, everything you consume to maintain your body- dedicate all of it to Me’.

‘Dedication' is to make an offering to the Lord. 



<a name='applnote_151'></a>
> What can we possibly offer the Lord of the universe?



As The Lord Himself stated- Your activities and responsibilities bring a feeling of having done something. They also bring enjoyment, experience and the sense of having rendered service. Do them in such a way that they are offered to Me.

In other words: You are a doer of your work. You have a purpose and experience the outcome. All of this belongs to Me and takes form, exists and sustains according to My will. So, leave all of it in Me, the ultimate controller and reason for all existence. 

With abundant affection towards Me, your ultimate joy is in being under My control alone - stay in this thought always, knowing that you are being controlled by Me. Any other person or 
[power](4-12.md#gods_and_other_powers)
 has this very same property. 


