## 9-34


```shloka-sa

मन्मना भव मद्भक्तो मद्याजी माम् नमस्कुरु ।
माम् एवैष्यसि युक्त्वैवम् आत्मानम् मत्परायणः ॥ ३४ ॥

```
```shloka-sa-hk

manmanA bhava madbhakto madyAjI mAm namaskuru |
mAm evaiSyasi yuktvaivam AtmAnam matparAyaNaH || 34 ||

```
`भव मद्भक्तः` `[bhava madbhaktaH]` Be My devotee, having excessive affection towards me. `मन्मना` `[manmanA]` Keep your mind in Me always. `मद्याजी` `[madyAjI]` Worship Me alone. `माम् नमस्कुरु` `[mAm namaskuru]` Surrender to Me, `मत्परायणः` `[matparAyaNaH]` have Me as your ultimate goal. `एवम्` `[evam]` In this way, `आत्मानम् युक्त्वा` `[AtmAnam yuktvA]` by attaching your thoughts to Me, `माम् एव एष्यसि` `[mAm eva eSyasi]` you will certainly attain Me.

'Keep your mind in Me always' - Like the unbroken flow of oil, have an unbroken stream of thought that stays in Me. 

I am the Lord of Lords, The One abode of all that's favorable, without a hint of a blemish. I am The One who knows everything. My every intent is fulfilled. I’m The Single Cause behind the entire universe, The Supreme Creator, The best among Men. 

My eyes are wide and pure like lotus leaves. My appearance is like a flawless dark-blue cloud. I have the brightness of a thousand suns that rise simultaneously.

I am a great ocean of tasty nectar. I have four gentle and large arms; I wear a yellow garment of great brilliance, decorated with a flawless crown, ear-ring, a garland, with bracelets on the biceps and forearms. 

I am an abode of enormous favorable qualities, limitless compassion, beauty, charm, generosity, grandeur and an innate nature to look at everyone equally with an ocean of affection; 

I am a refuge for the entire universe without exception, accepting everyone who seeks refuge without considering any of their peculiarities.

I am the controller of everything. 

Again, the Lord emphasizes - 'Be My devotee, have your thoughts stationed in Me with a limitless amount of love towards Me'. Once more, the emphasis is laid with the instruction 'Worship Me alone'- Experiencing Me is unlimited and uninterrupted joy. With such an experience, return to My worship always.

Worship is to let-go and run with the will of The Lord. Indeed, all actions like serving someone, transacting and experiencing are all different forms of serving the Lord. In this way, you will dedicate yourself to My worship - worship that is done out of excessive and unbroken affection towards Me, arising from your experience of Me. 

In the same way, keep your thoughts in Me.

Once again, the instruction is emphasized as – 
`माम् नमस्कुरु` `[mAm namaskuru]` :
 Occupy yourself with an intense and abundant spirit of surrendering to Me. Do this without opposing or intending to terminate the surrender - This surrender comes from an excess of affection towards Me - it comes from experiencing Me with limitless and uninterrupted joy.

'Have Me as your ultimate goal': The person who has Me as the ultimate goal is incapable of supporting himself without Me, hence he takes My refuge.

With this, fasten your mind and have Me as your ultimate goal. With an unbroken, limitless affection towards me, you get a mind that's capable of experiencing Me. With it, you will attain Me. You do this by thinking and meditating upon Me with your mind, experiencing and adoring Me, surrendering to Me and having Me as the ultimate goal.

Do your activities that are necessary to sustain your body, perform the duties prescribed in the scriptures and your daily routine. Do them for My pleasure, as work that I've effected, with My service as the driver. Always repeat My praise, be in the effort to achieve Me and surrender to Me out of love. Resolve that the entire universe is subject to My will. Being in My service is its only desire. Think of all My qualities. They give vast amounts of joy. Be present daily in this world and worship Me in the manner described before. You will definitely achieve Me.


